---
title: Popular Culture & The Fight to Control Images
description: Some thoughts on personal branding and perception, in this current technological age.
date: 2021-05-10T11:00:00.000Z
---

### A Set of Miniature Essays...

One’s image and perception in society serves to validify or nullify one’s existence and worth to the dominant class and ideology. The validity of one’s image is ultimately the amount of power one possesses. Thus, the control of images is the control of power, and in order to keep said influence over society, the dominant class wishes to create perceptions of the proper image one should amplify.

### On Modern Portrayals of Black Women

Patricia Hill Collins’ “Mammies, Matriarchs, and Other Controlling Images” displays the portrayal of African-American women as stereotypical binary figures: that of natural servants and aggressive hypersexualized figures and provides context as to the impact of controlling one’s image. These figures, such as Aunt Jemima, the pancake syrup mammie, or Black dominatrixes in pornography, have been recreated countless times. This creates an understanding of acceptable forms for the Black woman, both of which serve White people. Thinking in this way imposes the idea that the value of a Black woman in society is only in complacent roles. When one looks towards successful Black women in popular culture, it is their dominant European features that are championed (e.g., Zendaya’s small nose and light skin) or code switched “White educational” vernacular (e.g., saying a Black woman “doesn’t sound Black” or comes off as “more eloquent than other Black people). This allows White actors and White stories to be told above Black women’s; it is not deemed acceptable for Black women to exist in the same passive, true to oneself way, that White people can. The images that are replicated tell them and society that their role is submissive to others’. Popular culture champions the ruling class of meaning-makers, dominates society by classifying people based upon their differences. This is done through stereotyping and pinning groups above or beneath each other, in order to perpetuate historical inequalities and prejudices.

### Image Creation & The Model Minority Myth

Asian Americans have fallen victim to the model minority myth. These societal meaning-makers control 
Asian American images by white-washing their stories. Such an act erases the struggles and truth of Asian American lives and is an act to suppress their outrage and action. Robert G Lee speaks against such racism in “The Cold War Origins of the Model Minority Myth”. He proclaims that Asian Americans have been subject to the same stereotyping as Pocahontas: a silent, exotic, figure. Even the term oriental is an erasure of the diversity of Asia/ Asian culture. Images of Asian Americans in media are lazy. Similar to Pocahontas, Asian women are considered good because of their ability to serve white men, and Asian Americans are welcome in Western society because they assimilate quickly, but Asian American culture is more complex than just moving to America and immediately becoming trusted members of society. Their rights are the result of the fights African Americans rallied for in order to be considered equal. Their families have a rich history different from other Asian countries. This leads to underlying guilt by Asian Americans due to succeeding in a society that alienates other people of color and minorities. The media writes Asian people off as being White; some universities going as far as to cluster the two together during the application process. The price of Asian American assimilation was political silence and the creation of the model minority myth. The film Flower Drum song demonstrates Lee’s argument through its discussion of identity, race, and marriage. The female characters of the film wait for male characters to give their life meaning, whether that be economic success and stability or status. Their image is intended to be one that listens and serves, similar to that of Black women in Collins’ argument. In this characterization, although not nuanced with the connotation that Asian American women have a history charged with the strife of immigration and dual identity, Asian people and Asian women are unworthy of social power and influence, giving way for the dominant class to create their own narratives. To control image is to control culture and give others their roles.

Modern examples of the omnipresent model minority myth includes that of Laura Jean in the To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before franchise. Her Asianness is never referred to until the filmmakers needed to make her appear more cultured and round, as a character. Additionally, the scenes of traditional Korean dress and reference were only made after backlash from fans and Asian activists. Although one may speak out in society, it is at the agency of the elites (production studios, executives, “power-bloc”) to ensure that change is reflected into work that is disseminated into popular culture.

Another example is “The Female” from The Boys. This silent Japanese character has no name. Her only purpose is to act as a weapon for the main, White, cast. While the other White characters are given season-long backstory and development, The Female is restricted to a couple of episodes that are riddled with stereotypes about growing up in a communist state. She is sub-human, victim to the gaze of White writers who lack a scope of understanding about the Asian American experience. Her existence as a narrative device may have been unintentional, but her image has the sociological effect of reinforcing the cultural stereotypes that Asian Americans are silent, order taking, individuals, without variation. The Female lacks the subtlety and depth of a real person.

### Misrepresentations of Country Music in American Society

Popular culture also stereotypes and misrepresents beyond racial minorities, in the name of ensuring that the dominant ideology does not change, as seen by the “redneck myth” and Nadine Hubbs’ research in Rednecks, Queers, and Country Music. 

The redneck cultural stereotype implicates those identifying as rednecks/ perceived as rednecks to be uneducated, racist, culturally and religiously bigoted, working class, poor, and politically conservative. This image and stereotype serves to reinforce the capitalist and ideological goings of the dominant upper class. Because American society is vehemently capitalist and champions progression from working class laborer to desk executive, those hoping to achieve this success, along with those already there, vilify rednecks. Rednecks are ultimately people who are content with working; they are proud of their ability and ethic, but the dominant ideology suggests that one should be embarrassed for their working class status or contentedness in life. Distancing oneself from the redneck stereotype is a badge of honor for them; they are more dignified than these folk. Because rednecks are also typically country folk, it is also a statement of progression and urbanization to speak against them. Country life is supposed to be simple, humble, and racist. Making fun of rednecks and instilling this image onto people they dislike is yet another tactic of the dominant ideology to spread their message and dominance. 
Prejudices against rednecks bleeds into the societal dislike of country music. When asked what music one listens to, a common answer is “anything but country”, but country music is mainly disliked for the image that has been created around it (one that encompasses redneck culture). Widespread dislike for country music is indicative of middle-class subjectivities leading to misunderstandings of the working class and working class culture. Lower class people are the target audience of country music, so being against it allows them to remove themselves from the masses’ stereotypes and feel more high class. As industry rose and working culture kept growing, country music became an image of the poor. Additionally, critics from popular culture consistently review country music to be inauthentic, despite country’s focus on telling the stories of everyday people.

When Bo Burnham sings his “Country Song”, spewing out a slew of country tropes such as scarecrows, tractors, dirt roads, cold beers, pick-up trucks, etc., he’s mimicking the misappropriation of midclass culture to appeal to the masses, from the point of view of these record reviewers. Meanwhile, there are authenticities and beautiful, beloved songs, from country music that have been able to break the misunderstanding barriers of the image given to it by popular culture.

Dolly Parton’s “Nine to Five” is a song showcasing the tensions between the working class and upper class. Resisting latent life and inactivity, she sings about the pride she has in her work. However, Parton is still obviously a country star, with respect for the working class and country life. The song is meant to be a beacon of hope for that audience. It is reappropriated by the mainstream through Tiktok, however, to be about grind culture, working ridiculous hours to try and achieve the dominant ideology’s ideal of a perfect working class citizen, who wishes to achieve the high rise, suit wearing, culture of city life. Students are showing themselves studying to it and the organizational techniques they have employed in order to obtain the big name internships they’ve gotten. It’s a misunderstanding of intent and the completely valid life of a working class citizen. Additionally, others may see the song as one for farm workers, given Parton’s country accent. Country is not necessarily about farm life, though. Country is the soundtrack to the proud working people, but the image of country life being good is so challenged by popular culture that Parton’s song needed to be used in other ways in order for it to reenter the mainstream in 2021.

Lil Nas X was almost stifled by Billboard/ mainstream music tastemakers, after his song “Old Town Road” was removed from their top country charts. He has since become the longest #1 charting Billboard artist of all time, on their cumulative ranking. His ability to garner the support of a mainstream popular culture/ country music meaning-maker, Billy Ray Cyrus, allowed him to re-enter the good graces of the music industry power-bloc. Previous to Cyrus’ intervention, in which he created a collaboration with Nas X in order to allow him back onto the chart, Nas X was not seen as “country enough” due to his queerness, Blackness, and hip-hop influence. The modern day has seen shifts in what may be considered the dominant ideology. Culture can be shifted to allow new images to penetrate popular culture.
For example, liking anime used to be considered nerdy and unmasculine; something for kids. The aforementioned Asian American stereotypes made anime shows uncool: Asian men are bullied for a more feminine, younger appearance, being “nerds”, etc. An influence of this image may be WWII, after Vietnamese soldiers were hate crimed for holding hands with their friends (an act of support and trust in Vietnamese culture, but seen as gay to American soldiers), and Asian Americans were made out to be both dangerous, but also weak and less-than White Americans. It was embarrassing to watch anime, with memes such as “the power of God and anime” and Naruto running going viral in cringe compilations. However, now that high profile rappers have embraces anime and anime culture, it is acceptable to watch anime. Rappers have created anime inspired merchandise, frequently show themselves streaming anime, and make anime references in their music. The power of dominant figures in society to allow new images to be shown is one of their key abilities.

### Conclusion

Being aware of the vilification of non-mainstream popular culture allows us as a society to avoid being unlawfully prejudiced against others for their non-consequential personal likes, intrinsic state of being, and opens media up to clearer, more genuine, depictions of life. Consuming the media of other groups through their lens can create a more empathetic, eloquent, society. The power-bloc’s presence as gatekeepers of image is still very much alive and well, but one must consume media critically and be the change one wishes to see, as media and what enters popular culture is increasingly democratized through popular culture and independent publishing sites. The control of the dominant class on society has already come at the detriment of many social groups, and we must do what we can to build a better media future.